NEW JERSEY SENATOR ROBERT
MENENDEZ FACES CHARGES OF
CORRUPTION.
GOOD EVENING, I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ALSO AHEAD THIS WEDNESDAY:
IRAN NUCLEAR TALKS DRAG ON PAST
THE DEADLINE.
PROGRESS MADE, BUT STILL
SIGNIFICANT WORK NEEDED TO GET A
DEAL DONE.
>> Ifill: IN A FIRST FOR
CALIFORNIA, MANDATORY WATER
RESTRICTIONS.
WE TALK WITH GOVERNOR JERRY
BROWN ABOUT THE DRASTIC STEPS
HE'S TAKING TO CURB THE STATE'S
HISTORIC DROUGHT.
>> Woodruff: PLUS...
>> I CANNOT MOVE OR TURN OVER IN
BED.
IN FACT I AM A PRISONER OF MY
OWN BODY.
>> Woodruff: CANADA'S SUPREME
COURT RULES CITIZENS HAVE A
RIGHT TO END THEIR OWN LIFE.
BUT WITH ROOM LEFT FOR
INTERPRETATION, PRESSURE MOUNTS
TO IMPLEMENT DOCTOR-ASSISTED
DEATH.
>> THE COURT MADE IT VERY CLEAR
THAT PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED DYING
WOULD ONLY BE AN OPTION FOR
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE MENTALLY
COMPETENT AND ABLE TO MAKE A
FULLY INFORMED VOLUNTARY CHOICE.
>> Ifill: AND PRESIDENT OBAMA'S
INITIATIVE TO INVEST IN YOUNG
MEN OF COLOR PROMPTS A QUESTION:
WHAT ABOUT THE GIRLS?
>> BLACK GIRLS FACE THE SAME
INDICATORS IN TERMS OF
ATTENDANCE TO SCHOOL, IN TERMS
OF INTEREST IN SCHOOL, IN TERMS
OF READING LEVELS, MATHEMATICAL
LEVELS, IT'S FAR MORE OF A
RACIAL PROBLEM THAN IT IS A
GENDER PROBLEM.
>> Woodruff: THOSE ARE SOME OF
THE STORIES WE'RE COVERING ON
TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT
ANNOUNCED TODAY, THAT FOR THE
FIRST TIME SINCE THE 1980 ABSCAM
SCANDAL, IT IS INDICTING A
SITTING U.S. SENATOR ON FEDERAL
BRIBERY CHARGES.
FOR MORE ON THE ACTION AGAINST
NEW JERSEY DEMOCRAT ROBERT
MENENDEZ, WE TURN TO MATT APUZZO
OF THE NEW YORK TIMES, WHO'S
BEEN COVERING THE STORY.
MATT, EIGHT COUNTS OF BRIBERY,
22 COCOUNTS IN CALL.
TELL US A LITTLE BIT ABOUT WHAT
YOU KNOW FROM THE INDICTMENT
ABOUT WHAT THEY'RE CHARGING.
>> IT'S A REALLY BIG INDICTMENT,
GWEN.
I'M ACTUALLY ABOUT TWO-THIRDS
THE WAY THROUGH IT AND WE ALL
KNEW THIS WAS COMING BUT IT'S A
LOT BROADER AND A LOT DEEP DOPER
THAN I THINK A LOT OF US WHO
HAVE BEEN FOLLOWING THIS CLOSELY
EXPECTED.
IT BASICALLY DESCRIBES SENATOR
MENENDEZ TURNING HIS CAPITOL
HILL OFFICE INTO A CRIMINAL
ENTERPRISE, BASICALLY USING HIS
OFFICES AND USING HIS STAFF TO
GO OUT AND SOLICIT GIFTS, FIND
OUT WHAT HIS POLITICAL PATRON
WANTED IN RETURN AND MAKE SURE
IT GOT DONE.
DESCRIBES TRADING FAVORS,
POLITICAL FAVORS FOR TRIPS ON A
PRIVATE JET, FIRST-CLASS
AIRFARE, VACATIONS, A FIVE-STAR
HOTEL IN PARIS.
IT'S VERY BROAD.
THE INDICTMENT RUNS OVER 60
PAGES.
IT REALLY IS AN AGGRESSIVE MOVE
BY THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT.
>> Ifill: TELL US ABOUT HIS
POLITICAL PATRON.
>> SALOMON MELGEN, A FLORIDA EYE
SURGEON, THEY HAVE BEEN FRIENDS
SINCE 1990s.
BY ALL ACCOUNTS WERE FRIENDS.
THEY VACATIONED TOGETHER, THEY
EXCHANGED GIFTS AND THAT'S GOING
TO BE KEY TO THE DEFENSE.
MENENDEZ IS ARGUING THAT THIS IS
A FRIENDSHIP AND FRIENDS
EXCHANGE GIFTS AND THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT SAID THIS WENT WELL
BEYOND FRIENDSHIP, THIS WAS A
CORRUPT BRIBERY SCHEME.
>> Ifill: SO THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT IS SAYING THEY HAVE
EVIDENCE THAT THERE WAS
SOMETHING GIVEN IN EXCHANGE.
>> CORRECT.
IT'S NOT UNUSUAL TO CHARGE
BRIBERY, BUT IT'S CERTAINLY
EASIER TO CHARGE TAKING AN
UNLAWFUL GRATUITY.
BRIBERY IS LIKE PAYMENT FOR
SOMETHING WHEREAS A GRATUITY IS
KIND OF LIKE A TIP, A THANK YOU.
THEY'RE SAYING HE DID FAVORS FOR
GIFTS AND THAT'S A MUCH HIGHER
BAR FROM A LEGAL STANDARD AND I
THINK THAT'S WHY YOU SEE THE
TOTALITY OF THE EVIDENCE THAT
THE JUSTICE DEPARTMENT IS
THROWING OUT HERE.
>> Ifill: MATT APUZZO, FROM
THE "NEW YORK TIMES," THANKS FOR
BEING HERE.
>> ALWAYS GOOD TO BE HERE.
>> Woodruff: AND IN THE DAY'S
OTHER NEWS, IT APPEARS ONE OF
THE F.B.I.'S MOST WANTED
TERRORISTS HAS BEEN KILLED IN
THE PHILIPPINES.
ZULKIFLI BIN HIR, KNOWN AS
MARWAN, WAS A LEADER OF
MILITANTS LINKED TO AL-QAEDA,
AND BLAMED FOR BOMBINGS IN THE
PHILIPPINES.
F.B.I. OFFICIALS SAY D.N.A.
TESTS SHOW HE DIED IN A JANUARY
POLICE RAID IN THE SOUTHERN
PHILIPPINES.
>> Ifill: PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
SIGNED OFF ON A NEW WAY TO HIT
BACK AT FOREIGN HACKERS: WITH
SANCTIONS.
HIS EXECUTIVE ORDER SIGNED TODAY
IMPOSES PENALTIES FOR STEALING
TRADE SECRETS OR DAMAGING
COMPUTER SYSTEMS.
COMPANIES THAT KNOWINGLY PROFIT
FROM SUCH ATTACKS COULD ALSO BE
TARGETED.
>> Woodruff: THE REPUBLICAN
GOVERNOR OF ARKANSAS BACK-
TRACKED TODAY, AMID A BACKLASH
OVER A RELIGIOUS FREEDOM BILL.
IT FOLLOWED A SIMILAR FUROR IN
INDIANA THAT'S GALVANIZED GAY
ACTIVISTS AND PROMPTED
BUSINESSES TO DEMAND ACTION.
>> I'VE ASKED THEM TO CHANGE THE
CURRENT LAW AND I'VE ASKED THEM
TO RECALL IT AND CHANGE THE
LANGUAGE ON IT.
THAT'S MY REQUEST TODAY.
>> Woodruff: THE ANNOUNCEMENT
FROM GOVERNOR ASA HUTCHINSON
CAME A DAY AFTER THE ARKANSAS
HOUSE PASSED THE RELIGIOUS
OBJECTION MEASURE.
HUTCHINSON'S OFFICE EARLIER SAID
HE'D SIGN IT.
BUT HE CHANGED COURSE IN THE
FACE OF CHARGES THAT THE BILL
ALLOWS DISCRIMINATION BASED ON
SEXUAL ORIENTATION.
>> WHAT IS IMPORTANT FROM AN
ARKANSAS STANDPOINT IS THAT ONE,
WE GET THE RIGHT BALANCE AND
SECONDLY, WE MAKE SURE THAT WE
COMMUNICATE THAT WE'RE NOT GOING
TO BE A STATE THAT FAILS TO
RECOGNIZE THE DIVERSITY  OF OUR
WORKPLACE, OUR ECONOMY AND OUR
FUTURE.
>> Woodruff: HUTCHINSON WANTS
THE REPUBLICAN- DOMINATED
LEGISLATURE TO MAKE THE BILL
LOOK MORE LIKE THE FEDERAL
RELIGIOUS FEDOREM LAW, WHICH
PRESIDENT CLINTON SIGNED IN
1993.
THE FEDERAL LAW SAYS THE
GOVERNMENT SHALL NOT
"SUBSTANTIALLY BURDEN A PERSON'S
EXERCISE OF RELIGION."
IT DOES NOT DEFINE "PERSON," BUT
THE ARKANSAS BILL, AND A NEW LAW
IN INDIANA, DO, AND THEY INCLUDE
CHURCHES AND CORPORATIONS.
IN ADDITION, THE INDIANA LAW
BARS PRIVATE DISCRIMINATION
LAWSUITS AGAINST SOMEONE
CLAIMING A RELIGIOUS EXEMPTION.
AND THE ARKANSAS BILL SETS THE
LEGAL BAR HIGHER FOR THE
GOVERNMENT TO OVERRIDE A
RELIGIOUS EXEMPTION CLAIM.
THAT MAKES IT DIFFERENT FROM THE
20 OTHER STATES WITH A SIMILAR
LAW ON THE BOOKS, INCLUDING THE
ONE IN INDIANA.
JUST YESTERDAY, INDIANA GOVERNOR
MIKE PENCE MADE NEWS WHEN HE
CALLED FOR ADDITIONAL
LEGISLATION TO CLARIFY THE LAW
HE SIGNED ONLY LAST WEEK.
MEANWHILE, IN ARKANSAS, ANTI-
DISCRIMINATION ACTIVISTS
WELCOMED TODAY'S ANNOUNCEMENT,
BUT CALLED FOR MORE.
>> OUR WORK IS NOT FINISHED.
WE ARE NOT AT THE END OF THE
ROAD UNTIL ALL THE CITIZENS OF
THIS STATE ARE TREATED EQUALLY
UNDER THE LAW THAT SHOULD BE
GUARANTEED.
>> Woodruff: RETAIL GIANT WAL-
MART, BASED IN ARKANSAS, HAD
URGED GOVERNOR HUTCHISON TO VETO
THE BILL.
IT COMMENDED HIS ANNOUNCEMENT
TODAY.
SIMILAR PROPOSALS ARE PENDING IN
MORE THAN A DOZEN STATES.
>> Ifill: IN YEMEN TODAY, THERE
WERE CLAIMS AND COUNTER-CLAIMS
AFTER A MISSILE STRIKE KILLED AT
LEAST 35 WORKERS AT A DAIRY
PLANT.
IT HAPPENED IN THE RED SEA PORT
CITY OF HODAIDA, AS A SAUDI
ARABIAN COALITION EXPANDED ITS
AIR CAMPAIGN AGAINST SHIITE
REBELS.
THE REBELS SAID A WARPLANE FIRED
THE MISSILE THAT HIT THE
FACTORY.
THE SAUDIS SAID IT WAS AN ANTI-
AIRCRAFT MISSILE, FIRED BY THE
REBELS.
>> Woodruff: THE GOVERNMENT OF
IRAQ HAS DECLARED VICTORY OVER
ISLAMIC STATE MILITANTS WHO HAD
OVERRUN THE CITY OF TIKRIT.
BLACK SMOKE ROSE OVER THE CITY
AS IRAQI FORCES, ALONG WITH
SHIITE MILITIAS, CLEARED AWAY
THE REMAINING POCKETS OF
RESISTANCE.
ISIS MILITANTS HAD SEIZED THE
CITY LAST SUMMER.
PRIME MINISTER HAYDER AL-ABADI
HAILED THE ACHIEVEMENT AFTER A
MONTH-LONG OFFENSIVE.
>> ( translated ): THANK GOD THE
LOSSES ARE IN SMALL PERCENTAGE.
SOME TALKED ABOUT THE DELAY OF
THE OFFENSIVE, IT WASN'T
DELAYED, BUT WE HAD PREPARATIONS
TO MINIMIZE THE LOSSES.
>> Woodruff: U.S. AIR STRIKES IN
THE LAST WEEK HELPED THE IRAQIS.
THEIR NEXT TARGET COULD BE THE
CITY OF MOSUL, WHICH ISIS STILL
HOLDS.
>> Ifill: NIGERIA BEGAN ITS
FIRST PEACEFUL TRANSITION OF
POWER TODAY, WITH THE PRESIDENT-
ELECT, DECLARING HIS NATION HAS
SUFFERED ENOUGH.
MUHAMMADU BUHARI SPOKE IN THE
CAPITAL, ABUJA, AND VOWED TO
BATTLE CORRUPTION AND THE
ISLAMIST MILITANTS OF BOKO
HARAM.
>> YOU VOTED WITH YOUR HEART.
YOUR VOTE AFFIRMS THAT YOU
BELIEVE NIGERIA'S FUTURE CAN BE
BETTER THAN WHAT IT IS TODAY.
YOU VOTED FOR CHANGE AND NOW
CHANGE HAS COME.
>> Ifill: MEANWHILE, SUPPORTERS
OF THE ONE-TIME MILITARY
DICTATOR CELEBRATED IN THE
STREETS FOR A SECOND DAY.
BUHARI DEFEATED SITTING
PRESIDENT GOODLUCK JONATHAN IN
THE ELECTION.
>> Woodruff: BACK IN THIS
COUNTRY, McDONALD'S ANNOUNCED
ITS RAISING BASE PAY FOR WORKERS
AT ITS COMPANY-OWNED
RESTAURANTS.
STARTING JULY 1, NEW WORKERS
EARN A DOLLAR MORE THAN THE
LOCAL MINIMUM WAGE.
THE RAISE APPLIES TO 10% OF THE
14,000 McDONALD'S IN THE U.S.
THE REST ARE RUN BY FRANCHISEES,
AND ARE NOT AFFECTED BY THE
POLICY CHANGE.
>> Ifill: THERE'S WORD THAT MORE
THAN 61,000 BRIDGES IN THE U.S.
NEED REPAIR OR REBUILDING.
A REPORT IN "U.S.A. TODAY" CITES
A NEW ANALYSIS BY THE AMERICAN
ROAD AND TRANSPORTATION BUILDERS
ASSOCIATION.
THE GROUP SAYS THERE'S BEEN A
SLIGHT IMPROVEMENT FROM LAST
YEAR, BUT IT CALLS FOR NEW TAXES
TO SUPPORT THE HIGHWAY TRUST
FUND.
THE FUND HAS TO BE RENEWED BY
JUNE.
>> Woodruff: IN ECONOMIC NEWS,
CAR COMPANIES IN THE U.S. POSTED
MIXED RESULTS FOR MARCH.
HYUNDAI AND SUBARU REPORTED
DOUBLE-DIGIT GAINS, WHILE SALES
AT GM AND FORD SLIPPED.
STOCKS ALSO SANK AGAIN TODAY,
MOSTLY ON DISCOURAGING ECONOMIC
NEWS.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
DROPPED 78 POINTS TO CLOSE BELOW
17,700.
THE NASDAQ FELL 20 POINTS, AND
THE S&P 500 WAS DOWN EIGHT.
>> Ifill: AND TWO DEATHS OF NOTE
TONIGHT.
MISAO OKAWA PASSED AWAY IN JAPAN
AT THE AGE OF 117.
SHE'D BEEN DECLARED THE WORLD'S
OLDEST PERSON IN 2013.
THE TITLE NOW GOES TO AN
AMERICAN, GERTRUDE WEAVER OF
ARKANSAS, WHO IS 116 YEARS OLD.
AND GARY DAHL, CREATOR OF THE
1970'S BEWILDERINGLY POPULAR
FAD, THE "PET ROCK," HAS DIED.
HE MADE A FORTUNE SELLING PLAIN
ROCKS, IN A BOX, FOR $3.95.
GARY DAHL WAS 78 YEARS OLD.
>> Woodruff: STILL TO COME ON
THE NEWSHOUR:
THE LATEST ON A POSSIBLE IRAN
NUCLEAR DEAL.
CALIFORNIA GRAPPLES WITH A
HISTORIC DROUGHT.
DEBATING THE RIGHT TO DIE IN
CANADA.
ATLANTA EDUCATORS FOUND GUILTY
IN MAJOR CHEATING SCANDAL.
DO EDUCATION PROGRAMS THAT
INVEST IN YOUNG MEN OF COLOR
LEAVE OUT YOUNG WOMEN?
AN, WRDITER T.C. BOYLE'S LATEST
NOVEL EXPLORING THE VIOLENT,
DARK SIDE OF THE AMERICAN
PSYCHE.
>> Ifill: THE TALKS BETWEEN IRAN
AND SIX WORLD POWERS SEEMED TO
BE HEADED INTO YET ANOTHER DAY.
THE DEADLINE FOR A FRAMEWORK
AGREEMENT EXPIRED LAST NIGHT.
AND NO DEAL WAS REACHED TODAY
BUT THE U.S. SAID ENOUGH
PROGRESS HAS BEEN MADE TO
CONTINUE THE NEGOTIATIONS.
MAJOR POINTS OF DISAGREEMENT
REMAIN, AND BOTH THE AMERICANS
AND IRANIANS INDICATED IT WAS UP
TO THE OTHER SIDE TO BRIDGE THE
GAP.
WE HAVE BEEN VERY CLEAR, WHEN
I SAY WE, THE INTERNATIONAL
COMMUNITY, THE UNITED STATES
SITTING AT THAT TABLE ALONGSIDE
OUR GERMAN, FRENCH, BRITISH,
RUSSIAN COUNTERPARTS MAKING
CLEAR TO THE IRANIANS THEY NEED
TO MAKE SPECIFIC COMMITMENTS AND
IF THEY'RE UNWILLING THEN, YES,
THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY
WOULD BE IN A POSITION TO FORCE
TO CONSIDER ALTERNATIVES TO THE
APPROACH WE'VE DEMONSTRATED SO
FAR.
>>'VE  ISAID ALL ALONG THE
RECOGNITION BY ALL PARTIES THAT
THEY NEED TO EXHIBIT POLITICAL
WILL AND FLEXIBILITY TO MOVE
FORWARD.
IRAN HAS SHOWN ITS READINESS TO
ENGAGE WITH DIGNITY AND IT'S
TIME FOR OUR NEGOTIATING
PARTNERS TO SEIZE THE MOMENT AND
USE THIS OPPORTUNITY WHICH MAY
NOT BE REPEATED.
>> Woodruff: JOINING US AGAIN
FOR THE LATEST AT THE TALKS IS
INDIRA LAKSHMANAN AT "BLOOMBERG
NEWS."
YOU HAVE BEEN WATCHING THIS DAY
IN AND DAY OUT.
WHEN YOU HEAR THE TWO STATEMENTS
ONE FROM THE WHITE HOUSE AND ONE
FROM THE IRANIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER TALK ABOUT FLEXIBILITY
AND WILL POWER, TRANSLATE FOR
US.
WHERE ARE THEY TONIGHT?
>> I THINK YOU NEED TO EXAMINE
THE STATEMENTS ON TWO LEVELS.
ONE IS THE LEVEL OF REALITY AND
WHAT'S ACTUALLY GOING ON IN
THESE VERY, VERY DIFFICULT
NEGOTIATIONS.
AND WE KNOW THAT THEY ARE STUCK
ON A COUPLE OF ISSUES AND
PARTICULARLY RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT FOR IRAN'S NUCLEAR
PROGRAM AS WELL AS RELIEF FROM
UNITED NATIONS SANCTIONS WHICH
ARE NOT ABOUT ECONOMIC
PENALTIES, THEY'RE ABOUT
PROLIFERATION AND MILITARY SALES
SO THAT'S A MUCH TOUGHER ONE FOR
THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY TO
LIFT.
THAT'S THE REALITY.
THE OTHER SIDE, YOU HAVE THE
PUBLIC MESSAGING.
AS YOU'VE HEARD FROM JOSH ERNST
AND THE IRANIAN FOREIGN
MINISTER, EACH ONE IS SAYING THE
OTHER ONE IS THE ONE WHO NEEDS
TO MAKE THE COMPROMISES AND
THEY'RE WILLING TO WALK AWAY.
WHAT THE WHITE HOUSE SAID WAS
INTERESTING, IS THE REMAINING
TALKS, REMEMBER WE'RE GOING INTO
THE SECOND OVERTIME DAY HERE,
AND THAT'S BECAUSE THE TALKS,
THE WHITE HOUSE DOESN'T WANT TO
BE SEEN AS THE ONE WHO WALKED
AWAY.
THIS IS A GAME OF BRINKSMANSHIP.
IN THE END, I THINK THEY'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO COME UP WITH
SOMETHING, BUT EACH SIDE IS
HOLDING OUT FOR THE BEST DEAL
THEY CAN GET, GWEN.
>> Ifill: AS WE HEAR THESE
LITTLE LEAKS HERE AND THERE,
SEEMS LIKE THE IRANIANS ARE
CONSISTENTLY MORE OPTIMISTIC
THAN THE AMERICANS ARE.
IS THAT GAMESMANSHIP?
>> I THINK IT IS BECAUSE IT'S
TRYING TO PUSH THE AMERICANS  ,
IN AGAIN USING THE MEDIA, SAYING
WE'RE RIDE TO MAKE A DEAL AND
SIGN ON THE DOTTED LINE, IT'S
YOU WHO NEEDS TO BACK DOWN FROM
YOUR ENTRENCHED POSITIONS.
WE'VE SEEN SO MUCH OF THIS WHERE
WE HAD ONE EUROPEAN DELEGATION
TELLING US THERE WAS AN
ULTIMATUM LAST NIGHT WHICH THE
U.S. AND IRAN THEN DENIED.
WE HAD THE FRENCH FOREIGN
MINISTER LEAVING, JUST COME
BACK.
E
MINISTER LEAVING AND HE JUST
GAME BACK.
THERE'S A LOT OF BRINKSMANSHIP
GOING ON AND PART OF THIS IS A
SIGNAL TO THE OTHER SIDE TO
FOCUS THE ATTENTION ON WHAT THEY
WANTED TO BE, THIS DEADLINE, TO
GIVE THEM THREE MORE MONTHS WOO
WORK OUT THE TECHNICAL APECTS.
THE IRAN TALKS HAVE BECOME LIKE
THE BANKS WAR IN 2008, TOO BIG
TO FAIL, AND THEY WILL HAVE TO
PULL OUT SOME KIND OF ACCORD
EVEN IF IT'S FAR OF WHAT THE
OBAMA ADMINISTRATION AND
IRANIANS WANTED.
>> Ifill: 24 HOURS CAN MAKE
ALL THE DIFFERENCE?
>> WELL, I THINK WE'LL SEE
SOMETHING WITHIN THE NEXT DAY,
BECAUSE WE GOT A STATEMENT FROM
THE STATE DEPARTMENT THAT JOHN
KERRY WAS GOING TO STAY AT LEAST
TILL THURSDAY, SO THAT GIVES HIM
THE OPTION TO STAY LONGER, BUT I
THINK AT THIS POINT THE PEOPLE
ARE TIRED.
THE NEGOTIATORS HAVE BEEN UP ALL
NIGHT LONG, DAY AFTER DAY, AND I
THINK THEY WANT TO GET THIS
DONE.
SO I THINK WHAT WE'LL LOOK AT IS
SOME KIND OF A DECLARATION
WITHOUT TOO MANY DETAILS BEHIND
THAT.
I DON'T THINK YOU WILL SEE
DETAILED CODICILS THAT IRAN HAS
TO DO THIS AND THE OTHER SIDE
HAS TO DO THAT.
IT WILL BE MORE GOALS THAN
ACTUAL STEPS, AND THE STEEPS
WHICH WILL BE THE HARD PART ARE
GOING TO BE WHAT THEY HAVE TO
ARGUE ABOUT OVER EVERY LINE OVER
THE NEXT THREE MONTHS.
EVEN IF WE SEE AN AGREEMENT
TODAY, IT COULD FALL APART IN
THE NEXT THREE MONTHS BEFORE THE
JUNE 30 DEADLINE.
>> Ifill: WE KNOW YOU WILL BE
THERE TO EXPLAIN THE DETAILS.
INDIRA LAKSHMANAN OF BLOOMBERG,
THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: THE LONG-LASTING
AND SEVERE DROUGHT IN CALIFORNIA
LED GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN TO
ORDER NEW, AND HISTORIC, WATER
RESTRICTIONS TODAY.
THE MANDATORY RULES ARE DESIGNED
TO REDUCE WATER USE BY 25%
THROUGH 2016.
THE GOVERNOR MADE THE
ANNOUNCEMENT ON A DAY WHEN
WINTER SNOWPACK IS MEASURED IN
THE SIERRA NEVADA MOUNTAINS.
TODAY, THERE WAS NO SNOW ON THE
GROUND THERE AND THE SNOWPACK IS
LOWER THAN AT ANY TIME SINCE
1950.
HARI SREENIVASAN IS IN
CALIFORNIA AND JOINS US FROM
PUBLIC STATION KPBS IN SAN
DIEGO.
>> Sreenivasan: IN FACT,
GOVERNOR BROWN WENT TO THE
SIERRA NEVADA MOUNTAINS TO MAKE
HIS POINT TODAY.
THE RESTRICTIONS WOULD AFFECT
WATER USE IN NUMEROUS WAYS,
INCLUDING LANDSCAPING AND LAWNS,
FARMING, GOLF COURSES AND MORE.
THE GOVERNOR JOINS US NOW FROM
SACRAMENTO.
EVEN GOING BACK TO YOUR STATE OF
THE STATE ADDRESS IN 2014, YOU
HAVE BEEN TALKING ABOUT THIS
STATE OF EMERGENCY.
THERE HAS BEEN PLENTY OF
SCIENTIFIC DATA TO BACK UP THE
DROWVMENT WHAT TOOK SO LONG TO
GET THE RESTRICTIONS IN PLACE?
>> IT TAKES TO LONG BECAUSE
WE'RE A LARGE STATE, 38 MILLION
PEOPLE, WE EXTEND FROM THE
OREGON BORED TORE THE MEXICAN
BORDER.
WE HAVE HUNDREDS OF BORDER
AGENCIES.
SO TO MOVE POLICY FROM
CONCEPTION AND FULL OPERATION
AND IMPLEMENTATION DOES TAKE
TIME AND IS NOT DONE BY TWO OR
FIVE OR 50 PEOPLE IN THE STATE
CAPITAL BUT RATHER WATER
DISTRICTS, WATER ENGINEERS,
WATER PERSONNEL AND CITIZENS ALL
WORKING TOGETHER.
I'VE TAKEN DOZENS OF MEASURES
OVER THE LAST THREE TO FOUR
YEARS AND NOW I THINK WE'VE
REALLY COME TO A CULMINATION
WHERE INSTEAD OF VOLUNTARY, IT'S
25% IS OUR GOAL, AND IT IS
MANDATORY, AND IT'S UNLIKE WHAT
WE'VE HAD BEFORE.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT PEOPLE
TAKING OUT THEIR LAWNS, USING
ALL THESE OTHER DIFFERENT
WATER-SAVING TECHNOLOGIES AND
THINGS LIKE DESAL ANYIZATION AND
OTHER WAYS THAT CALIFORNIANS
WILL HAVE TO LIVE DIFFERENTLY.
>> Sreenivasan: ENCOURAGING
PEOPLE TO DECREASE WATERING
THEIR LAWNS SEEMS A DROP IN THE
BUCKET WHERE 80% IS USED BY THE
AGRICULTURE SECTOR.
>> THE FARMERS HAVE TAKE AN LOT
OF HITS.
THE FIELDS ARE AFOUL IN MANY
CASES, THE TREES ARE DYING,
THEY'RE NOT GETTING THE WATER
THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT PROMISED,
THEY'RE NOT GETTING A DROP, ONLY
GET A SMALL FRACTION FROM THE
STATE WATER PROJECT.
AGRICULTURE IS FUNDAMENTAL TO
CALIFORNIA AND, YES, THEY USE
MOST TO HAVE THE WATER AND
PRODUCE THE FOOD AND THE FIBER
WHICH WE USE AND EXPORT TO
COUNTRIES ALL AROUND THE WORLD.
WE'RE ASKING THEM TO GIVE US
INFORMATION, FILE AGRICULTURE
WATER PLANS, TO AMEND THE
UNDERGROUNDWATER, TO SHARE WITH
OTHER FARMERS.
THIS IS A VERY COMPREHENSIVE
PROGRAM THAT IS NEVER BEEN
ATTEMPTED ANYWHERE AT ANYTIME IN
CALIFORNIA HISTORY.
WE HAVE A LOT TO LEARN.
WE HAVE TO LISTEN TO HOW IT
ROLLS FORWARD AND OUT.
BUT I THINK THE FARMERS ARE
SUFFERING A LOT AND THEY ARE
ASKED TO DO A LOT FOR THIS
EXECUTIVE ORDER.
>> Sreenivasan: IS IT TIME TO
ZERO IN ON SPECIFIC INDUSTRIES?
WE KNOW IT COSTS AN ENORMOUS
AMOUNT OF WATER TO HAVE A SINGLE
ALMOND TO EAT OR THE FRACK
INDUSTRY WHERE A LOT OF PEOPLE
ARE CONCERNED THEY'RE EXTRACTING
A LOT OF WATER IN THAT PROCESS
AS WELL.
IS IT TIME FOR US TO ZERO IN ON
THE LARGEST CUSTOMERS OR USERS
OF WATER?
>> THEN YOU'RE PUTTING
GOVERNMENT IN A ROLE
AND CHEWING, ALMONDS INSTEAD OF
WALL NUTH, TOMATOES INSTEAD OF
RICE.
THAT IS A BIG BROTHER THAT
OUTSIDE OF WAR OR SOME ABSOLUTE
UNPRECEDENTED CATASTROPHE
SHOULDN'T EVEN BE CONSIDERED.
IN TERMS OF WELL STIMULATION AND
HOW YOU USE WATER TO GET OIL OUT
OF THE GROUND, CALIFORNIANS
DRIVE 332 BILLION MILES.
THAT'S HOW FAR THEY WENT LAST
YEAR.
THEY'RE USING 18 BILLION GALLONS
OF GASOLINE AND DIESEL.
SO IF WE DON'T TAKE IT OUT OF
OUR GROUND, WE'LL TAKE IT OUT OF
SOMEBODY ELSE'S.
SO I THINK WHAT WE HAVE TO DO IS
GET EFFICIENT, REDUCE WHEREVER
WE CAN AND WHEN WE HAVE JUST AN
ORDINARY LAWN OR SOMETHING ELSE
JUST FOR YOUR OWN PLEASURE AND
WE DON'T HAVE THE WATER, THAT
WILL GENERATE BEING ABLE TO SAVE
1.5 BILLION, THAT'S AS BIG AS
THE MAJOR DAMS AS THAT PEOPLE
WOULD LIKE TO BUILD, AND THAT'S
$5 BILLION.
WE HAVE TO CHANGE MANY THINGS WE
HAVE BEEN COMFORTABLE WITH, ALL
OF US, SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA,
NORTHERN CALIFORNIA, FARMERS,
HOMEOWNERS, APARTMENT DWELLERS.
THIS IS A BIG TRANSITION THAT
I'M INITIATING WITH THIS
EXECUTIVE ORDER AND WE'RE GOING
TO HAVE TO WORK AT IT TO GET IT
RIGHT.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU MENTIONED
EARLIER THE DIFFERENT WATER
DISTRICTS THAT ALL HAVE TO AGREE
TO SOMETHING LIKE.
THIS THERE ARE SO MANY
DISPARITIES BETWEEN COUNT TO
COUNT AND FARMERS DIG
DEEPER WELLS TAPPING INTO THE
GROUNDWATER THAT'S DEPLETING AT
A RAPID PACE.
>> FOR THE FIRST TIME WE'LL GET
INFORMATION OF HOW MUCH FARMERS
ARE ACTUALLY USING AND HOW MUCH
UNDERGROUND.
WE NEVER GOT THAT INFORMATION
BEFORE.
NOW WE'RE MAKING IT MANDATORY.
AND THIS IS A COMPLICATED
BALANCE OF FORCES, OF
BUSINESSES, OF COMPANIES, OF
FARMERS, OF FAMILIES, AND WE'RE
TRYING OUR BEST TO LAY OUT A
FRAMEWORK, AN OPERATIONAL GAME
PLAN THAT WILL REDUCE WASTELAND
WATER USE, UNNECESSARY WATER USE
AND GIVE INCENTIVES FOR NEW
TECHNOLOGIES BOTH FOR EFFICIENCY
AND GENERATING NEW WATER WHETHER
BY RECYCLING OR DESALINZATION
AND ALL THAT TOGETHER IS WHAT
WE'RE TRYING TO, MANDATORY AND
WILL BE ENFORCED.
SO I THINK WE OUGHT TO SEE HOW
THIS GOES FORWARD AND WE CAN
ADJUST UP OR DOWN WHEN WE LEARN
WHAT THE RESULTS ARE.
>> Sreenivasan: BRIEFLY, HOW
WILL THE REST OF THE COUNTRY
FEEL THE IMPACT OF WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN CALIFORNIA?
WHAT ARE THE ECONOMIC
CONSEQUENCES OF THIS DROUGHT?
>> FIRST OF ALL, THE PRICE OF
FOOD MAY GO UP BECAUSE THE COST
OF WATER IS GETTING MUCH HIGHER.
THAT'S ONE THING.
AND, IN GENERAL, WHAT'S
HAPPENING IN CALIFORNIA IS ONE
VARIANT OF THE CHANGE IN WEATHER
AND CLIMATE.
SO OTHER PLACES HAVE TO LOOK AT
THIS AND UNDERSTAND, WE ARE --
WHEN I SAY "WE," HUMAN KIND ALL
OVER THE WORLD IS PUTTING
BILLIONS OF TONS OF CHEMICALS,
CO2, METHANE AND OTHER OF THE
GREENHOUSE GASES AND THAT'S
WARMING AND DISRUPTING THE VERY
DELICATE WEB OF LIFE AND BALANCE
IN THE HYDROLOGICAL CYCLE AND IN
THE CLIMATE.
SO WE'RE ALL GOING TO HAVE TO DO
A LOT TO ADAPT TO THE KIND OF
CHANGED WORLD WE'RE BRINGING
UPON OURSELVES.
>> Sreenivasan: THANK YOU
GOVERNOR JERRY BROWN OF
CALIFORNIA.
THANKS SO MUCH.
THA>>NK YOU.
>> Ifill: FOUR U.S. STATES--
OREGON, WASHINGTON, MONTANA AND
VERMONT-- NOW HAVE LAWS ALLOWING
DOCTORS TO HELP PEOPLE DIE, AS
DO A HANDFUL OF EUROPEAN
NATIONS.
BUT NO COUNTRY HAS EVER LAUNCHED
PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED SUICIDE ON
THE SCALE NOW UNDERWAY IN
CANADA.
EARLIER THIS YEAR, THE SUPREME
COURT THERE RULED UNANIMOUSLY
THAT ALL CANADIANS HAVE A
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHT TO HAVE
DOCTORS HELP THEM DIE.
THE COURT GAVE THE GOVERNMENT
JUST ONE YEAR TO REGULATE
MEDICALLY-ASSISTED DEATH FOR THE
ENTIRE NATION.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JOHN
LARSON REPORTS FROM BRITISH
COLUMBIA.
>> MY PAIN OR DISCOMFORT IS
VIRTUALLY CONSTANT.
>> Reporter: WHEN MEDICALLY
ASSISTED DEATH WAS ARGUED BEFORE
THE CANADIAN SUPREME COURT,
ELAYNE SHAPRAY'S STATEMENT WAS
EXHIBIT A.
>> I CANNOT MOVE, OR TURN OVER
IN BED.
IN EFFECT, I AM A PRISONER OF MY
OWN BODY.
I NO LONGER CONSIDER MY LIFE
WORTH LIVING, UNLESS I ALSO
POSSESS THE MEANS TO LEAVE IT AT
THE TIME OF MY CHOOSING.
>> Reporter: SHAPRAY WAS A
NURSE, AN ACTIVE MOTHER OF TWO,
UNTIL MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS STRUCK.
NOW 68 YEARS OLD, SHE CAN NO
LOGER NDO MUCH OF ANYTHING
WITHOUT HELP, INCLUDING, AND
THIS IS WHY SHE'S EXHIBIT A,
TAKE HER OWN LIFE.
HOW FAR AWAY ARE YOU FROM THAT
POINT WHERE YOU WOULD NO LONGER
BE ABLE PHYSICALLY-- TO END YOUR
OWN LIFE?
>> I CAN SEE IT FROM HERE.
>> Reporter: THE QUESTION OF
WHETHER DOCTORS SHOULD BE
ALLOWED TO HELP PEOPLE LIKE
ELAINE DIE WAS AT THE CENTER OF
THE CANADIAN SUPREME COURT
DECISION.
THE COURT RULED: LAWS MAKING
PHYSICIAN ASSISTED DEATH
ILLEGAL, VIOLATED CANADIANS'
CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS IN CASES
WHERE AN ADULT "CLEARLY CONSENTS
TO THE TERMINATION OF LIFE" AND
HAS A "GRIEVOUS AND IRREMEDIABLE
MEDICAL CONDITION".
THE MOST RECENT POLLS SHOW 86%
OF THE CANADIAN GENERAL PUBLIC
APPROVE.
>> THERE'S NO QUESTION THERE'S
GONNA HAVE TO BE SOME SERIOUS
THOUGHT ABOUT FINDING THE RIGHT
BALANCE, BUT IT IS SOMETHING
WHOSE TIME HAS COME, IT HAS TO
BE.
>> I THINK PEOPLE DO HAVE THE
RIGHT TO DECIDE FOR THEMSELVES
ABOUT THE END OF THEIR LIFE, AND
HOW-- THE QUALITY OF THAT.
>> HI, I'M DR. DONALD LOW.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR, A FAMOUS
CANADIAN MICROBIOLOGIST PLEADED
FOR A CHANGE IN THE LAW, JUST
EIGHT DAYS BEFORE HE DIED FROM
BRAIN CANCER.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF CLINICIAN
OPPOSITION TO DYING WITH
DIGNITY.
I JUST WISH THEY COULD LIVE IN
MY BODY FOR 24 HOURS, AND I
THINK THEY WOULD CHANGE THAT
OPINION.
>> Reporter: THE HIGH COURT'S
DECISION CAME SOONER THAN HE
WOULD HAVE IMAGINED.
THE COURTS DECISION LEFT ROOM
FOR INTERPRETATION, HOWEVER.
FOR EXAMPLE, A PATIENT'S
CONDITION MUST BE, AMONG OTHER
THINGS, SEVERE AND INCURABLE.
BUT THAT'S NOT THE SAME AS
TERMINAL.
WHAT IF A PATIENT HAS SEVERE
ARTHRITIS, WOULD THEY BE
ELIGIBLE?
OR WHAT IF THEY'RE DISABLED, OR
MENTALLY ILL?
REMEMBER, ELAYNE SHAPRAY SUFFERS
FROM M.S., A DEBILITATING BUT
NOT LIFE ENDING DISEASE.
YOU'RE NOT IN THE END STAGE OF A
TERMINAL ILLNESS.
>> IT'S AN INTERMINABLE ILLNESS.
>> Reporter: INTERMINABLE.
>> INTERMINABLE.
HOW DO YOU WEIGH THAT?
HOW DO YOU MEASURE THAT UNLESS
YOU'RE SITTING IN MY WHEELCHAIR?
>> WELL, IT SEEMS CLEAR FROM
WHAT THE SUPREME COURT HAS SAID
THAT YOU NEED NOT BE TERMINALLY
ILL TO QUALIFY.
>> Reporter: DR. WILL JOHNSTON,
AN OUTSPOKEN OPPONENT OF
PHYSICIAN ASSISTED DEATH SAYS
THE COURT'S LIBERAL LANGUAGE,
THAT, THE PATIENT MAY SUFFER
FROM AN "DISEASE OR DISABILITY,"
AND, THAT SUFFERING IS DEFINED
AS "INTOLERABLE TO THE
INDIVIDUAL" LEAVES THE DOOR OPEN
FOR ABUSE.
>> YOU DO NOT EVEN NEED TO BE
PHYSICALLY ILL.
BECAUSE THEY SPECIFICALLY STATED
THAT PSYCHOLOGICAL SUFFERING
WOULD QUALIFY AS WELL.
>> SO WHAT THE COURT SAID WAS
THAT-- THE RIGHT TO ASSISTED
DYING SHOULD BE AVAILABLE ONLY
IN NARROW CIRCUMSTANCES.
>> Reporter: GRACE PASTINE, OF
THE BRITISH COLUMBIA CIVIL
LIBERTIES ASSOCIATION, WHICH
SUCCESSFULLY BROUGHT THE CASE TO
THE SUPREME COURT, SAYS THE
SPECIFICS OF EXACTLY WHO WILL BE
ELIGIBLE FOR ASSISTED DYING HAVE
YET TO BE DETERMINED, BUT WILL
LIKELY BE NARROWLY DEFINED.
>> THE COURT MADE IT VERY CLEAR
THAT PHYSICIAN-ASSISTED DYING
WOULD ONLY BE AN OPTION FOR
INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE MENTALLY
COMPETENT AND ABLE TO MAKE A
FULLY INFORMED VOLUNTARY CHOICE.
I THINK, FOR EXAMPLE, SOMEONE
SUFFERING FROM A  SEVERE MENTAL
ILLNESS WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO
QUALIFY BECAUSE THEY WOULD NOT
BE ABLE TO MEET THE CONSENT
REQUIREMENTS.
>> Reporter: THE CANADIAN
MEDIL ASCASOCIATION, FOR YEARS
FIRMLY OPPOSED TO PHYSICIAN
ASSISTED DYING, HAS RECENTLY
SOFTENED. THIS MONTH ITS
PRESIDENT ANNOUNCED THE C.M.A.
"SUPPORTS PATIENTS WHO SEEK
'MEDICAL AID IN DYING' AS WELL
AS PHYSICIANS' CHOICE TO
PARTICIPATE."
STILL, OPPONENTS LIKE JOHNSTON
HOPE PAIN MANAGEMENT, PALLIATIVE
CARE, WILL BE SUFFICIENT FOR
MOST PATIENTS AND DOCTORS.
>> WE CAN DO THAT WITHOUT
TURNING OUR 2,400 YEARS OF-- OF
MEDICAL, ETHICAL HISTORY ON ITS
HEAD, WITHOUT CROSSING THAT
BRIGHT LINE BETWEEN ATTEMPTING
TO TREAT THE SYMPTOMS OF THE
PATIENT AND INTENDING TO KILL
THE PATIENT.
>> BUT MANY, MANY PEOPLE DO NOT,
IN FACT, HAVE THAT PAINLESS
DEATH.
>> Reporter: LESLIE LAFOREST,
WAS DIAGNOSED THREE YEARS AGO
WITH A RECURRENCE OF STAGE FOUR
ANAL CANCER, ALTHOUGH HER CANCER
IS IN REMISSION, SHE KNOWS IF IT
RETURNS HER DEATH COULD BE
PROLONGED AND PAINFUL.
>> I HAVE ABSOLUTELY THE
STRONGEST WILL THAT I WILL NOT
GO THROUGH THAT FINAL CHAPTER,
WHENEVER THAT COMES.
>> Reporter: LAFOREST TESTIFIED
IN THE CASE THAT WENT TO THE
SUPREME COURT THAT CURRENT LAW
WOULD FORCE HER TO TAKE HER
LIFE, EARLY, WHILE SHE COULD
STILL DO IT HERSELF, A POINT THE
COURT REFERENCED IN ITS
DECISION.
YOU WANT TO WALK DOWN THE BLACK
LIST FOR ME?
>> ONE OF THE SCENARIOS IS
GASSING MYSELF.
OBVIOUSLY, CARBON MONOXIDE FROM
MY CAR.
AND THEN I PLAN IN MY MIND, IT'S
GOT TO BE WHEN MY HUSBAND'S OUT
OF TOWN, BECAUSE IT WOULD BE
HORRIFYING FOR HIM, AND MY
DAUGHTER AT SCHOOL OR AWAY ON
VACATION.
THEN I NEED TO GO TO HOME DEPOT
AND I HAVE TO BUY SOME HOSE.
AND THEN I'VE GOT TO GET SOME
DUCT TAPE.
THE PROBLEM IS, THEN I START TO
THINK, "BUT WAIT A SECOND, IS
THERE REALLY GOING TO BE ENOUGH
CARBON MONOXIDE TO ACTUALLY DO
THE JOB?
OR WILL IT BE JUST ENOUGH TO
KIND OF PUT ME INTO A COMA OR
MAKE ME IN A VEGETATIVE STATE
WHERE I ACTUALLY DON'T DIE?
>> Reporter: AN IMPORTANT TWIST
ON ALL OF THIS OF COURSE IS THAT
THE CLOCK IS TICKING.
THE HIGH COURT GAVE THE
GOVERNMENT ONE YEAR TO COME UP
WITH A NEW, NATIONAL LAW.
THAT'S JUST 12 MONTHS, TO AGREE
UPON SOMETHING THEY HAVE BEEN
COMPLETELY UNABLE TO AGREE UPON
FOR MANY YEARS.
>> WHETHER OR NOT THAT WILL
ACTUALLY HAPPEN IS, I THINK, A
MATTER OF SPECULATION BECAUSE, I
THINK THERE'S, YOU KNOW, A
NUMBER OF US WHO ARE WORRIED
THAT THE GOVERNMENT IS GOING TO
DRAG ITS FEET ON THIS.
>> Reporter: A LIBERAL MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT, LIBBY DAVIES HAS
SUPPORTED RIGHT TO DIE ISSUES.
SHE SAYS DESPITE THE COURT'S
RULING, THE CURRENT GOVERNMENT
MAY DELAY ANY NEW LAW UNTIL
AFTER NATIONAL ELECTIONS NEXT
OCTOBER.
>> WHICH WOULD MAKE IT
INCREDIBLY T.
GOVERNMENT THAT HAD, YOU KNOW, A
WHOLE BUNCH OF OTHER THINGS ON
THEIR AGENDA, IT WOULD MAKE IT
VERY DIFFICULT.
>> Reporter: DIFFICULT BECAUSE
CANADIAN PROVINCES, AND
TERRITORIES, SIMILAR TO OUR
STATES, ADMINISTER THE COUNTRY'S
HEALTH CARE.
IDEALLY, THEY, TOO WOULD BE
CONSULTED TO CRAFT ANY NEW LAW.
IS THERE A SENSE HERE THAT THAT
CAN GET DONE?
>> OH, I THINK IT'S ENTIRELY
POSSIBLE.
I MEAN, WE HAVE PROVINCIAL
FEDERAL TERRITORIAL DISCUSSIONS
AND POLICY DEVELOPMENTS ALL THE
TIME.
IT'S PART OF THE CANADIAN
REALI, ITTYS THE WAY THIS
COUNTRY WORKS.
WHAT IS CRITICAL AND WHAT WOULD
MAKE IT AN OBSTACLE IS IF THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT BASICALLY,
KIND OF, WALKS AWAY AND SAYS,
WELL, YOU KNOW, WE REALLY WANT
NOTHING TO DO WITH THIS.
>> Reporter: IF NO FEDERAL LAW
IS PASSED, CURRENT PROVINCIAL
LAWS IN ACCORDANCE WITH THE
COURT'S DECISION WILL HAVE TO
SUFFICE, AT LEAST UNTIL
SOMETHING IS SORTED OUT.
>> THERE'S NOT A LOT LEFT.
>> HERE'S YOUR MEDICINE ELAYNE.
>> Reporter: WHEN THE CASE WENT
TO THE SUPREME COURT, LAWYERS
REQUESTED ELAYNE SHAPRY BE GIVEN
SPECIAL CONSIDERATION, A WAIVER,
THAT WOULD ALLOW A DOCTOR TO END
ELAYNE'S LIFE WHILE THE
GOVERNMENT WRITES A NEW LAW.
THE COURT TURNED HER DOWN,
MEANING ELAYNE WILL HAVE TO WAIT
A FULL YEAR  BEFORE A DOCTOR
COULD LEGALLY END HER LIFE.
>> Reporter: YOU FEEL LIKE YOU
HAVE A YEAR?
>> I THINK I'D RATHER NOT ANSWER
THAT QUESTION.
>> Reporter: FOR NEWSHOUR, JOHN
LARSON IN VANCOUVER BRITISH
COLUMBIA.
>> Woodruff: A JURY IN ATLANTA
HAS CONVICTED 11 FORMER PUBLIC
SCHOOL TEACHERS, PRINCIPALS AND
ADMINISTRATORS ON RACKETEERING
CHARGES TIED TO CHEATING ON
STANDARDIZED TESTS.
THE CONVICTIONS CAME ON THE
EIGHTH DAY OF JURY DELIBERATIONS
AFTER A SIX-MONTH LONG TRIAL
THAT DETAILED SYSTEMATIC
CHEATING IN MORE THAN 40
SCHOOLS, INVOLVING MORE THAN 170
EDUCATORS AND ADMINISTRATORS.
35 PEOPLE WERE INDICTED.
AND PRIOR TO THE TRIAL, MORE
THAN 20 PLEADED TO LESSER
CHARGES.
DULTON COUNTY DISTRICT ATTORNEY
ABOUT THE IMPACT HE HOPED THE
TRIAL WILL HAVE.
OUR INTENT IN THIS CASE IS
SIMPLY TO GET OUR COMMUNITY TO
STOP AND TAKE A LOOK AT OUR
EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM.
THAT'S WHAT WE WANTED.
WE WANTED PEOPLE TO LOOK AT THE
EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM THAT THEIR
CHILDREN ATTENDED EVERY DAY,
AFTER THEY MAKE THE ASSESSMENT,
TO LOOK TO SEE WHAT WE HAD TO DO
AS A COMMUNITY TO MOVE FORWARD.
>> Woodruff: SIGNS OF
WIDESPREAD SHEETING IN ATLANTA
SCHOOLS WERE FIRST UNCOVERED IN
2008 BY AN "ATLANTA
JOURNAL-CONSTITUTION"
INVESTIGATION.
KEVIKEVIN RILEY IS THE EDITOR AD
JOINS ME NOW.
WELCOME TO THE PROGRAM.
EXPLAIN TO US AGAIN WHAT THE
CHARGES WERE.
HOW DID CHEATING ON A SCHOOL
TEST BECOME SOMETHING PEOPLE MAY
GO TO PRISON FOR?
>> IN THE END, WE HAVE TO
REMEMBER THERE WERE BONUSES AND
FINANCIAL INCENTIVES TIED TO
PERFORMANCE OF STUDENTS ON THE
TEST SCORES.
SO IN THE END, TEACHERS,
ADMINISTRATORS, PRINCIPALS AND
ADMINISTRATORS HAVE TO ATTEST TO
THE VALIDITY TO HAVE THE TEST
AND THAT'S HOW THE PROSECUTOR
PURSUED RACKETEERING CHARGES
BECAUSE HIS CASE WAS BASED ON
ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES IN THE GUISE
OF LEGITIMATE ENTERPRISE.
>> Woodruff: WE NAMED SOME OF
THE POSITIONS.
WHO WERE THE PEOPLE BEING
CHARGED AND WHAT EXACTLY DID
THEY DO?
>> THEY REALLY WERE IN A WIDE
RANGE FROM THE SCHOOL'S
PRINCIPALS, ADMINISTRATORS,
TEACHERS, BUT IN THE END, THE
MOST COMPELLING AND DISTURBING
PART OF WHAT WE LEARNED THROUGH
ALL THIS WAS TEACHERS WERE
ACTUALLY ALTERING STUDENTS'
ANSWERS ON TESTS, GIVING
STUDENTS THE CLUES TO THE
ANSWERS.
I THINK THAT WAS REALLY THE PART
THAT EVERYONE FOUND MOST
DISTURBING, THAT EDUCATORS WOULD
GO THAT FAR TO LITERALLY CHEAT
AND CHANGE ANSWERS IN ORDER TO
REACH GOALS THEY HAD BEEN GIVEN.
>> Woodruff: WHAT PORTION OF
THE ENTIRE ATLANTA SCHOOL SYSTEM
WAS INVOLVED?
WHAT DOES 44 SCHOOLS REPRESENT?
>> IT WAS NEVER A MAJORITY OF
THE SCHOOLS BURKS AT ONE POINT,
THE STATE'S INVESTIGATION NAMED
DOZENS OF SCHOOLS AND ALMOST 200
EDUCATORS.
SO IT WAS NOT A SMALL THING, BUT
THERE WERE STILL MANY, MANY MORE
SCHOOLS THAT LEGITIMATELY GAVE
THE TEST, RECORDED THE RESULTS
AND DEALT WITH STUDENTS WHO WERE
STRUGGLING TO ACHIEVE THOSE
RESULTS.
>> Woodruff: THERE WAS VERY
STRONG LANGUAGE USED NOT ONLY BY
THE ATTORNEY, THE PROSECUTOR,
BUT OTHERS IN DESCRIBING WHAT
THE FORMER SUPERINTENDENT OF
SCHOOLS, SHE PASSED AWAY EARLIER
THIS YEAR, BEVERLY HALL, WHAT
SHE HAD DONE, BUT SOUNDS AS IF
IT WAS VERY MUCH A SYSTEMATIC
EFFORT TO CHANGE THESE RESULTS.
>> WELL, ONE OF THE MOST
TROUBLING THINGS ABOUT WHAT
HAPPENED IS THAT WE NEVER HEARD
FROM BEVERLY HALL, THE
SUPERINTENDENT, AND THE CENTRAL
FIGURE IN THIS ENTIRE SCANDAL.
SHE WAS NEVER UNDER OATH, NEVER
FACED TRIAL BECAUSE OF HER
ILLNESS.
AND SHE WAS ADAMANT THAT THESE
THINGS WENT ON WITHOUT HER
KNOWLEDGE AND THAT SHE DID NOT
CREATE A SITUATION WHERE THEY
WOULD BE ALLOWED TO GO ON.
THAT IN THE END, MANY PEOPLE
FELT THAT SHE WAS THE MAIN
PERSON BEHIND WHAT TURNED OUT TO
BE A VERY SAD CONSPIRACY THATTO
CHEAT ON TESTS.
>> Woodruff: SO KEVIN RILEY,
WHAT'S THE EFFECT BEEN ON THE
ATLANTA SCHOOL SYSTEM OF ALL
THIS?
>> WELL, THERE HAVE BEEN A LOT
OF CHANGES IN THE SYSTEM AND A
NEW SUPERINTENDENT AND I THINK
RENEWED FOCUS BY THE COMMUNITY
ON THE SYSTEM, AND I THINK IF
THERE IS A LESSON, AN IMPORTANT
THING TO REMEMBER ABOUT THE
SCANDAL, IT'S THIS -- EDUCATING
CHILDREN IN AN URBAN SCHOOL
DISTRICT IS A BIG CHALLENGE.
IT'S A CHALLENGE IN ATLANTA,
IT'S A CHALLENGE ACROSS THE
OPPORTUNITY, AND IF A COMMUNITY
IS GOING TO COMMIT TO THAT, IT
HAS TO UNDERSTAND THAT THE
ANSWERS ARE NOT SIMPLE.
ATLANTA UNDERSTANDS THAT NOW.
I THINK THERE ARE MANY OF US WHO
HOPE ATLANTA WILL LEAD THE WAY
IN FINDING NEW AND BETTER WAYS
TO EDUCATE URBAN SCHOOL
CHILDREN.
>> Woodruff: AND WHAT ABOUT
THE COMMUNITY'S, THE CITIZENS'
REACTION, THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE
THERE?
>> IT'S BEEN VERY HARD ON THE
CITY.
WHEN THE CITY IS ON THE NATIONAL
NEWS, YOU HOPE IT'S FOR A GOOD
REASON.
ATLANTA HAS MADE NEWS IN THIS
CASE AND WILL BE KNOWN WHERE
PROBABLY THE WORST CHEATING
SCANDAL RECORDED EVER HAPPENED.
IN THE END, I THINK IT WILL GIVE
ALL OF US A NEW FOCUS ON THE
IMPORTANCE OF EDUCATION AND
ATLANTA ALWAYS BOUNCES BACK.
>> Woodruff: SO THE 11 FOUND
GUILTY, POTENTIAL SENTENCING,
THEY COULD SPEND YEARS IN
PRISON?
>> RIGHT.
I MEAN, I THINK ONE OF THE
THINGS TO NOTE ABOUT HOW THE
CONVICTIONS CAME DOWN IS THEY
WERE CONVICTED OF RACKETEERING
WHICH IS A VERY SERIOUS CHARGE.
USUALLY, WHEN YOU HEAR THAT KIND
OF CHARGE, IT INVOLVES, YOU
KNOW, ORGANIZED CRIME AND CAREER
CRIMINALS, AND THE JURY
CONVICTED THEM ON THOSE COUNTS
AND THOSE SENTENCES CAN BE
PRETTY STIFF.
>> Woodruff: WHAT WOULD YOU
SAY THE NATIONAL IMPACT HAS
BEEN?
YOU HAVE BEEN INVOLVED IN
JOURNALISM FOR SOME TIME.
DO YOU THINK THE COUNTRY HAS
SEEN, LEARNED SOMETHING FROM
THIS?
>> I THINK THIS SCANDAL HAS
CALLED INTO QUESTION THE WISDOM
OF SO MUCH EMPHASIS ON
STANDARDIZED TESTS.
I THINK THAT THAT, AGAIN, WILL
BE THE LESSON FROM ATLANTA,
WHICH IS, YOU KNOW, IT'S A BIG
JOB TO EDUCATE KIDS.
OF COURSE, WE WANT TO MEASURE
THEIR PROGRESS.
JUST TESTING AND TESTING AND
TESTING AND PUTTING TEACHERS
UNDER ENORMOUS PRESSURE, THAT'S
NOT THE ANSWER.
THAT HAS GOT TO BE SOMETHING WE
THINK ABOUT AND FIGURE OUT A
BETTER WAY TO DO.
>> Woodruff: IT CERTAINLY
FEEDS INTO A BIGGER DEBATE ABOUT
THE WISDOM OF TESTING.
KEVIN RILEY, WRITER AND EDITOR
OF THE "ATLANTA
JOURNAL-CONSTITUTION."
S.ANKS FOR TALKING WITH U
>> THANKS FOR HAVING ME.
>> Ifill: FOR EDUCATORS ACROSS
THE NATION, FEW PROBLEMS HAVE
BEEN AS PERSISTENT AS THE
ACADEMIC DISPARITY BETWEEN BOYS
OF COLOR AND THEIR WHITE PEERS.
LAST YEAR, PRESIDENT OBAMA
LAUNCHED AN INITIATIVE, IN PART
TO REVERSE THE TREND.
BUT AS EVEN AS THE "MY BROTHER'S
KEEPER INITIATIVE" TAKES SHAPE,
NAGGING QUESTIONS REMAIN ABOUT
WHO IS BEING LEFT OUT.
THE NEWSHOUR'S APRIL BROWN
REPORTS FOR OUR AMERICAN
GRADUATE SERIES.
WE WILL INVEST $20 MILLION
OVER THE NEXT THREE YEARS TO
SUPPORT THE EMPOWERING MALES OF
COLOR INITIATIVE.
>> THE PLAN INCLUDES THE
CREATION OF AN ALL-BOYS PUBLIC
POOREST NEIGHBORHOODS.
>> THIS IS A SYMBOL OF MAN.
ONE OF MANY RECENT
EFFORTS AROUND THE COUNTRY
SUPPORTING THE BROTHERS
INITIATIVE PRESIDENT OBAMA
ANNOUNCED MORE THAN A YEAR AGO.
>> AS A BLACK STUDENT YOU ARE
FAR LESS LIKELY THAN A WHITE
STUDENT TO BE ABLE TO READ
PROFICIENTLY BY FOURTH RAID.
BY HIGH SCHOOL, YOU'RE FAR MORE
LIKELY TO HAVE BEEN SUSPENDED OR
EXPELLED.
>> MY BROTHER'S PEOPLE RECEIVED
MORE
>> Reporter: MY BROTHER'S KEEPER
RECEIVED MORE THAN $300 MILLION
IN PLEDGES FROM FOUNDATIONS AND
PRIVATE BUSINESSES TO SUPPORT
LITERACY, JOBS PROGRAMS AND
CRIMINAL JUSTICE REFORMS FOR
BOYS OF COLOR.
BUT THE GROWING EMPHASIS ON
SUPPORTING MINORITY MALES IS
BEING CALLED INTO QUESTION-- NOT
FOR WHO IS BEING HELPED, BUT
RATHER WHO IS BEING LEFT OUT:
YOUNG WOMEN OF COLOR.
>> THERE IS A CRISIS ABOUT WHAT
BOYS OF COLOR ARE FACING.
THERE IS A CONVERSATION ABOUT
GIRLS OF COLOR.
>> KIMBERLY IS A PROFESSOR OF
LAW AT U.C.L.A. COLUMBIA AND
AUTHOR OF "BLACK GIRLS MATTER,"
EXAMINING THE LIVES OF GIRLS OF
COLOR IN BOSTON AND NEW YORK
CITY SCHOOLS.
>> WE FOUND THAT BLACK GIRLS
WERE 11 TIMES MORE LIKELY TO BE
SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE IN BOSTON,
10 TIMES MORE LIKELY TO BE
SUBJECT TO DISCIPLINE IN NEW
YORK, AND THAT'S A GREATER
RACIAL DISPARITY BETWEEN GIRLS
THAN THERE IS BETWEEN BOYS.
>> Reporter: AND SHE SAYS THE
PROBLEMS OFTEN EXTEND INTO THE
CLASSROOM.
>> BLACK GIRLS FACE THE SAME
INDICATORS IN TERMS OF
ATTENDANCE TO SCHOOL, IN TERMS
OF INTEREST IN SCHOOL, IN TERMS
OF READING LEVELS, MATHEMATICAL
LEVELS, IT'S FAR MORE OF A
RACIAL PROBLEM THAN IT IS A
GENDER PROBLEM.
>> Reporter: THE AMERICAN CIVIL
LIBERTIES UNION SHARES SOME OF
HER CONCERNS.QUESTIONING
THE LEGALITY OF WASHINGTON,
D.C.'s PLAN TO CREATE A PUBLIC
SCHOOL EXCLUSIVELY FOR BLACK AND
LATINO MALES, BECAUSE IT MAY
VIOLATE THE EQUAL PROTECTION
CLAUSE OF THE CONSTITUTION AND
TITLE NINE OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS
ACT.
>> BY HELPING YOUNG BOYS AND
YOUNG MEN OF COLOR WE'RE NOT
EXCLUDING HELPING GIRLS AND
YOUNG WOMEN OF COLOR.
>> Reporter: BRODERICK JOHNSON
IS AN ASSISTANT TO PRESIDENT
OBAMA AND CHAIR OF THE "MY
BROTHER'S KEEPER" TASK FORCE.
HE SAYS THE NEEDS OF MINORITY
GIRLS ARE BEING ADDRESSED, WITH
THE WHITE HOUSE COUNCIL ON WOMEN
AND GIRLS CREATED IN 2009, AND
FIRST LADY MICHELLE OBAMA'S
CONTINUING EFFORTS TO DEVELOP
NEW PROGRAMS.
>> WE DON'T WANT TO LEAVE
ANYBODY BEHIND, BUT WE
ESPECIALLY WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT BOYS AND YOUNG MEN OF COLOR
UNDERSTAND THAT THERE IS HOPE
FOR THEM, THAT THEIR SUCCESS IS
TIED TO THE SUCCESS OF THIS
COUNTRY AND THAT WHEN THEY ARE
BETTER AND THEY ARE AND THAT
WHEN THEY ARE BETTER AND THEY
ARE FUNCTIONING BETTER THAT THE
GIRLS IN THEIR LIVES, THE WOMEN,
THEIR MOTHERS, ARE ALL IN A
BETTER PLACE AS WELL.
>> Reporter: FOR AFRICAN-
AMERICAN MEN AND BOYS, THE
PROBLEMS ARE STARK: THEY ARE
TWICE AS LIKELY TO BE HELD BACK
IN ELEMENTARY SCHOOL, ONLY HALF
AS LIKELY TO GRADUATE FROM
COLLEGE COMPARED TO THEIR WHITE
PEERS, AND IF CURRENT TRENDS
HOLD, AN ESTIMATED ONE IN THREE
BLACK MALES BORN TODAY CAN
EXPECT TO SPEND SOME TIME IN
PRISON.
>> I WOULD SAY TO YOU WITH NO
APOLOGY THAT THE DISPARITIES
THAT AFFECT BOYS AND YOUNG MEN
OF COLOR ARE PROFOUND.
GENERATIONS AND WE NEED TO BREAK
THAT CYCLE.
>> Reporter: BALTIMORE'S CHERRY
HILL NEIGHBORHOOD IS AN AREA
THAT STRUGGLES WITH HIGH LEVELS
OF VIOLENCE AND LOW GRADUATION
RATES, BUT THERE'S AN EFFORT
UNDERWAY TO BREAK THE CYCLE.
>> I CAME FROM THIS COMMUNITY SO
I UNDERSTAND THAT THERE ARE MANY
OBSTACLES THAT THESE KIDS FACE
BUT I ALSO KNOW THAT THERE IS
POTENTIAL IN THESE KIDS.
>> Reporter: HOWARD JOHNSON IS
AN ENGINEER BY DAY, AND HE
SPENDS MANY OF HIS NIGHTS AS A
MENTOR AT HIGHER ACHIEVEMENT, AN
AFTER SCHOOL AND SUMMER ACADEMIC
PROGRAM FOUNDED IN 1975 THAT IS
NOW WORKING WITH THE MY
BROTHER'S KEEPER INITIATIVE.
HIGHER ACHIEVEMENT OFFERS
TUTORING, AND A CULTURE OF HIGH
EXPECTATIONS FOR MIDDLE SCHOOL
STUDENTS LIKE DARRYL BROWN AND
RICARDO JONES.
>> SINCE HIGHER ACHIEVEMENT CAME
>> IN PAST REPORT CARDS, I HAVE
STRAIGHT As.
>> NOW, FOR EVERY MAN, WOMAN AND
CHILD --
>> IT STAEDRT IN
WASHINGTON, D.C. AND HAS
EXPANDED TO RICHMOND, VIRGINIA,
BALTIMORE AND PITTSBURGH.
HE TPROGRAM HAS SERVED YOUNG
WOMEN OF COLOR FOR DECADES.
>> I THOUGHT SCHOOL WAS THE
WORST THING EVER.
>> Reporter: EIGHTH GRADER
JORDIN McFADDIN SAYS HIGHER
ACHIEVEMENT HAS HELPED HER RAISE
HER GRADE POINT AVERAGE TO A
3.0, AND BECOME MORE CONFIDENT.
>> I LEARNED TO TALK OUT LOUD
BECAUSE AT FIRST I USED TO BE
QUIET AND USED TO STAY TO MYSELF
AND DIDN'T INTERACT WITH A LOT
BUT WHEN I CAME TO HIGHER
ACHIEVEMENT THEY TAUGHT ME THAT
IT'S OK YOU'VE JUST GOT TO WARM
UP TO IT.
>> Reporter: McFADDIN NOW PLANS
TO PURSUE A MUSIC CAREER AFTER
GRADUATING FROM HOWARD
UNIVERSITY.
KIMBERLE WILLIAMS CRENSHAW
BELIEVES IT WILL BE DIFFICULT TO
MAKE SIGNIFICANT PROGRESS
REDUCING THE ACHIEVEMENT GAP IN
MINORITY COMMUNITIES TIL UNTHERE
ARE MORE EFFORTS TO SUPPORT ALL
CHILDREN OF COLOR.
>> WE HAVE TO REALIZE
TRADITIONAL INTERVENTIONS
INCLUDED EVERYBODY FROM
INTEGRATION TO THE RIGHT TO VOTE
TO EMPLOYMENT, PROTECTION AND SO
THE INTERVENTIONS NEED TO BE
ADDRESSED TO MEN AS WELL AS
WOMEN, BOYS AS WELL AS GIRLS.
>> Reporter: AND HIGHER
ACHIEVEMENT PLANS TO CONTINUE
THAT WORK WITH A NEW $12 MILLION
IMMIGRATION GRANT FROM THE
DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION.
FOR THE PBS "NewsHour", I'M
APRIL BROWN IN BALTIMORE,
MARYLAND.
>> Woodruff: NOW, WE TURN TO
BOOKS, AND TO THE LATEST
ADDITION ON THE "NEWSHOUR
BOOKSHELF."
T.C. BOYLE HAS JUST PUBLISHED
HIS 15th NOVEL.
IN "THE HARDER THEY COME," HE
EXPLORES THE VIOLENCE AND DARKER
CORNERS OF THE AMERICAN DREAM.
RECENTLY, HE SAT DOWN WITH
JEFFREY BROWN AT "BUSBOYS AND
POETS," A RESTAURANT AND
BOOKSTORE CHAIN IN THE
WASHINGTON, D.C. AREA.
>> HI, JEFFERY.
GLAD TO BE HERE.
>> Brown: THIS NOVEL I'VE READ
IS BASED ON REAL EVENTS.
WHAT PULLED YOU IN?
WHAT HAS TO HAPPEN FOR YOU TO
SAY, I'M GOING TO WRITE THIS
STORY?
>> IT'S A STORY ABOUT AMERICAN
VIOLENCE, PARTICULARLY AMERICAN
GUN VIOLENCE, THE LONE SHOOTER.
SO LIKE EVERYBODY ELSE IN THE
COUNTRY, I'M DISTURBED BY WHY
THIS HAPPENS, WHERE IT'S
HAPPENING.
SO I FOUND A NEWS STORE OUT OF
NORTHERN CALIFORNIA IN WHICH A
LONE SHOOTER WHO HAPPENED TO BE
SCHIZOPHRENIC AND SUPPLIED WITH
AUTOMATIC WEAPONS BY A GENEROUS
SOCIETY KILLED TWO PEOPLE IN THE
WOODS.
>> Brown: SO THERE'S THE STORY
THAT YOU HAVE AND YOU BUILD UP
THAT, BUT THEN THERE'S A QUOTE
AT THE BEGINNING BY D.H.
LAWRENCE, THE ESSENTIAL AMERICAN
SOUL IS HARD, ISOLAT, STOIC AND
A KILLER.
IT HAS NEVER MELTED.
THE AMERICAN SOUL, YOU'RE ALSO
SOMEHOW EXPLORING THAT?
>> I NEEDED SOMEPLACE TO BUILD
THE BOOK.
I HAVE A READY-MADE STORY OF THE
KILLER.
I'M CHANGING THE NAMES, BUT
USING THE LOCALE AND THE POLICE
REPORT AND SO ON.
BUT WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
YOU DON'T KNOW WHAT IT MEANS
UNLESS YOU PUT IT IN CONTEXT.
SO THE TITLE "THE HARDER THEY
COME" AND THIS QUOTE FROM
LAWRENCE PROVIDES A TEMPLATE FOR
ME TO THEN PAINT AROUND.
MY STORIES' NOVELS ARE ALL
ORGANIC.
JUST STARTS, I SEE SOMETHING AND
I FOLLOW IT.
SO THIS WAS IMPORTANT TO HAVE
THIS QUOTE, IS THAT TRUE?
IS IT TRUE?
HAS IT MELTED?
ARE WE REALLY LIKE THAT?
THAT'S THE PROPOSITION I WANT TO
FIND OUT ABOUT.
>> AND YOU'RE EXPLORING IT AS
FICTION?
>> RIGHT.
AS AN ARTIST, I DON'T HAVE AN
AGENDA, I'M EXPLORING SOMETHING
AND INVITING YOU TOKES PLOAR IT
WITH ME.
THAT'S THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN
FICTION AND ESSAY.
>> Brown: YOU HAVE CHARACTERS
HERE WHO ARE PART OF FRINGE
GROUPS IN THE HILLS, AGAINST THE
GOVERNMENT, ANTI-AUTHORITARIAN,
THAT EXISTS IN OUR WORLD.
DO YOU RESEARCH IT?
DO YOU LOOK INTO IT OR DO YOU
START WITH SOMETHING AND THEN
JUST IMAGINE YOUR WAY THROUGH
IT?
>> I TAKE CHOICE B.
I'VE NEVER COME FROM
JOURNALISTIC TRADITION, I'VE
ONLY SIMPLY BEEN AN ARTIST.
I JUST WRITE FICTION.
IT'S KIND OF A MIRACLE FOR ME
BECAUSE I DON'T KNOW WHAT IT
WOULD BE.
I DREAM IT UP.
IT'S SO VERY EXCITING.
>> Brown: AND WHAT IS IT THAT
INTERESTS YOU ABOUT THIS
UNDERBELLY OR THIS VIOLENCE YOU
SEE IN OUR CULTURE TODAY?
>> AGAIN, I READ THE NEWSPAPER
EVERY DAY, AND I WORRY ABOUT
EVERYTHING.
I'VE WRITTEN A LOT ABOUT THE
ENVIRONMENT AND ENVIRONMENTAL
DEGREDEGRADATION, GLOBAL WARMIN.
I JUST WONDER WHAT'S HAPPENING
OURTO SOCIETY, HOW IS IT
DISSOLVING?
WHAT'S WRONG WITH COMPASSION?
WHAT'S WRONG WITH NEGOTIATION.
SEEMS TO BE LIKE IN SOME OF THE
HOLLYWOOD MOVIES WHERE THERE'S
AN EXCLUSIVELY GOOD GUY AND BAD
GUY.
THE BAD GUY DOES SOMETHING
TERRIBLE TO THE GOOD GUY'S
FAMILY AND THE GOOD GUY COMES
BACK, WIPES THEM ALL OUT AND
THEY ALL CHEER.
I THINK IT'S REALLY MORE COMPLEX
THAN THAT AND I WRITE A NOVEL TO
FIND OUT.
>> Brown: YOU'RE ALSO A
PROFESSOR OF LITERATURE.
DO YOU SEE A LOT OF WRITING
ABOUT THIS KIND OF STUFF, YOU
KNOW, I MEAN, THE HARD STUFF OF
AMERICAN LIFE?
DO YOU WISH THERE WERE MORE?
>> NO, I DON'T WISH THERE WERE
MORE AND I ALSO DON'T SEE A LOTT
OF IT.
EVERY WRITER CHOOSES HIS OR HER
OWN TERRITORY AND DOES WHAT
THEY'RE GOING TO DO.
SO I DON'T HAVE A WISH TO SEE
ONE KIND OF WRITING OR ANOTHER.
I JUST WANT TO SEE GOOD WRITING.
BUT, YES, I AM VERY SOCIALLY
ENGAGED AND I DO WRITE ABOUT
SUCH THINGS OFTEN AND HAVE ALL
MY CAREER BECAUSE THAT'S WHAT
INTERESTS ME.
>> Brown: I READ YOU GREWKING CD
WITHOUT A LOT OF BOOKS AROUND.
>> NO BOOKS.
MY FATHER WAS RAISED IN AN
ORPHANAGE AND MY MOTHER WAS THE
SALUTE ATTORNEY OF HER HIGH
SCHOOL CLASS BUT IT WAS THE
DEPRESSION AND SHE LIVED IN A
FAMILY OF POVERTY AND COULD
GOTTEN TO COLLEGE.
SO THEY BOTH ENCOURAGED ME TO
BECOME EDUCATED.
WE HAD A WONDERFUL PUBLIC SCHOOL
SYSTEM.
I WENT TO THE STATE UNIVERSITY
OF NEW YORK AND FOR GRADUATE
STATE UNIVERSITY IN IOWA AND
IOWA CITY.
SO I AM A PRODUCT OF MOVING UP
THROUGH EDUCATION AND ONE REASON
WHY I CONTINUE TO TEACH AND
BELIEVE IN ESPECIALLY A LIBERAL
ARTS EDUCATION SO THAT YOU CAN
HAVE TIME TO FIND OUT WHO YOU
ARE AND WHAT YOU ARE.
I DIDN'T EVEN KNOW THAT ONE
COULD BE A WRITER UNTIL I WAS AN
UNDERGRAD.
>> Brown: REALLY?
THAT'S WHEN BOOKS AND LITERATURE
CAME INTO YOUR LIFE.
>> EXACTLY.
>> Brown: THE IDEA OF WRITING.
I STARTED OUT AS A MUSIC
MAJOR, FLUNKED MY AUDITION.
I SAID, WHAT AM I GOING TO DO?
I WAS IN A LIBERAL ARTS COLLEGE,
I LOVED HISTORY AND SAID I WAS A
HISTORY MAJOR.
BUT WE TOOK A COURSE AND READ
STORIES BY O'CONNOR AND I SAID
I'M A DOUBLE MAJOR, HISTORY AND
ENGLISH.
JUNIOR YEAR, I LAUNCHED A CAREER
OF WRITING AND HERE I AM.
I LOVED THE IDEA OF ALLOWING ONE
PERSON TO GROW AND DISCOVER WHAT
HE OR SHE CAN DO IN LIFE.
>> Brown: WHAT OTHER WRITERS
TURNED YOU ON BESIDES FLANNERY
O'CONNOR.
>> HEMINGWAY.
SHORTLY THEREAFTER WHEN I
STARTED TO WRITE MYSELF, IT WAS
THE WHOLE WAVE OF THE ABSURDIST
PLAY WRITES AND JOHN BARTH AND
ROBERT COOVER, PEOPLE WHO HAD A
LARGE CANVASS, AND SENSIBILITY
AND HIGHLY LITERATE.
I LOVE THAT SORT OF STUFF AND
STILL DO.
>> Brown: YOU'RE A FAIRLY
PROLIFIC NOVELIST.
>> I'M STILL EXTREMELY YOUNG AS
YOU CAN SEE.
THIS IS MY 25th BOOK.
>> Brown: YEAH.
SO I FIGURE I'LL WRITE
ANOTHER 25 MORE AND WE'LL SEE
WHAT HAPPENS AFTER THAT.
THIS ONE, "THE HARDER THEY
COME."
T.C. BOYLE, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
THANKS, JEFFERY.
IT WAS A LOT OF FUN.
>> Ifill: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
NEW JERSEY SENATOR BOB MENENDEZ
WAS INDICTED ON FEDERAL
CORRUPTION CHARGES.
A SOURCE FAMILIAR WITH HIS PLANS
TOLD THE NEWSHOUR HE WILL STEP
DOWN AS RANKING DEMOCRAT ON THE
FOREIGN RELATNS CIOOMMITTEE, BUT
NOT RESIGN FROM THE SENATE.
AND THE IRAN NUCLEAR TALKS KEPT
GOING IN LAUSANNE, SWITZERLAND,
WITH THE DEADLINE EXTENDED FOR A
SECOND DAY.
TUNE IN LATER THIS EVENING.
ON CHARLIE ROSE, FAREED
ZAKARIA'S DEFENSE OF A LIBERAL
EDUCATION, AND EVAN OSNOS ON
AND THAT'S THE NEWSHOUR FOR
TONIGHT.
ON THURSDAY, A STORY FOR
CHOCOLATE LOVERS ON THE FIGHT
OVER WHAT CADBURY CANDIES CAN BE
SOLD IN THE U.S.
I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ON-LINE, AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING.
FOR ALL OF US HERE AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.